Right level of effort.
How much time should you spend on developing your estimates?
What is the right level of effort to dedicate to your estimates?
Let's explore this further.
Level of expertise of the people involved in the estimation process.
What level of expertise do they have?
In the technology, in the business area?
Are they familiar with the business problem and with potential
solutions and their technical implications?
Impact of soft estimates.
Estimates that don't have much requirements behind them or facts behind them.
This may impact future revenues and profitability,
if the estimates are soft, or weak.
Amount of functional risks in the features being considered.
A feature that is well understood is much easier to estimate than
one that is still blurry or which will most likely require many
iterations before getting it right.
So you know you may need to put some more effort into that area,
to flush that out.
If there's a great functional risk.
If there is no functional risk or very low risk,
even though it's fuzzy,
you may not need to spend the time to drill into that estimate.
Amount of technical risk in the features being considered.
If the technical aspects of a solution are unknown,
the less accurate the estimates can be.
So again, it's iterative over time, repeat, repeat, repeat.
Here are a few more topics on the right level of
effort to apply to your activities.
Organization's ability to mitigate risks or manage or handle risks.
An organization that has flexibility in adding resources,
removing scope,
or pushing dates might require less accuracy in estimates up front
than an organization that has little flexibility.
So you need to look at the management team,
the people around you,
and how well they can adapt or mitigate risk on the level of
effort you need to put into an estimate.
Level of trust between stakeholders and estimators.
Remember the stakeholders could be the CEO,
the CFO, business leaders, IT director,
and most importantly your customers and users.
What level of trust is there?
So you can make estimates with a certain amount of effort and
still be okay to do it again and try again.
This trust allows stakeholders to be more accommodating
and make trade-offs in your process.
Trust encourages bolder estimates.
So, much time can be wasted, in other words,
you could spend a lot of level of effort if you're not sure
the receiver of your estimate trusts you.
And you may be wasting time drilling into things that aren't that important.
The greater the trust, the better and smoother the process works for estimation.
Very key to remember, work on the trust factor of your customers and management.
And you can do that by having a great process and tools,
which we'll talk about in the next module.
Conversely,
penalizing those that create incorrect estimates
encourages more conservative estimates,
which usually means padding or I don't care much about this process.
We're going to talk about that in the next module as well.
Going from good to great.
The phrase going from good to great exemplifies that by
moving to a solid process you will, I believe,
make a quantum leap forward in not only creating better estimates,
but becoming more comfortable in making them.
It's a win/win.
Project estimation is a process.
Not just for you, but your entire team and maybe even your entire department.
So, your goal, as a project management and estimator,
is to have a process for estimation that you can repeat,
you want to be able to repeat your estimation process for each
assignment or task you are given to estimate.
You want to be able to predict.
With the right process and tools you'll be able to
better predict your estimates.
And lastly, improve. You can only improve your process if it is documented and can be measured.